App Developer Raj:- Isn’t it AMMAAAZING??!
App Tester Raj:- It has to be amazing, is
it??
App Developer Raj:- No, I mean, I just wanted
to know if you liked it…
App Tester Raj:- What do you mean?
I am supposed to like it, eh??
App Developer Raj:- … What do you feel?!
App Tester Raj:- Feel?
Where on earth are you bringing those things
from?
Feelings?
Are we watching a movie here, or what??
Namaste!
Four Hundred and Thirty One!
“Do you like it?”
is the question.
But, “Do you like it?”
shouldn’t be the question.
How to solicit user feedback, that is what
we are going to talk about today.
What is User Experience?
What is Usability?
If you look for the definition, it would run
something like this.
“The extend to which a product can be used
by specified users to achieve specific goals
with effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction
in a specified context of use!”
If we dwell in some more detail on the key
words in this definition, first up, Users:
Anybody can be a user, but who are you preparing
this for… don’t try to please everybody,
don’t try to build something that’ll be
suitable for everybody, you’ll end up building
something that’s not LOVED by anybody..
So, target specific users.
Then, Goals: What are we trying to help them
achieve?
Are you going to tell them they can achieve
ANYTHING THEY WANT with this?
That won’t work!
There should be some things your product won’t
do.
Only then, you can target it at some things
it will do very well.
Similarly, we have to be Effective: I spent
this much time and this much money..
I couldn’t have done this well with any
other tool.
It should be effective.
Easy.
Understandable.
Not causing any kind of difficulty for me
in any form.
Effective.
Also, it should be Efficient: Minimising costs,
minimising energy consumed, minimising the
imprint, the carbon footprint perhaps, that
is efficient.
Finally, Satisfaction: It is pretty hard to
measure it..
They also call it Delight.
That complete satisfaction, fulfilment they
call it.
You can’t enquire and find out.
You may not also be able to understand it
by watching.
Perhaps you have to do this by befriending
and habituating only!
Google gifted us with a framework.
A beautiful framework, and a beautiful acronym
to go along with it too!
Are you looking for feedback from the user?
Use the HEART!
What does this HEART stand for?
First, H stands for Happiness.
Are they just satisfied that they got the
job done, or is there a hint of joy, a sense
of delight, a blooming, a blossoming…
Is there that little thing..
it has happened to me many times, am sure
it has happened to you too..
You would be reading a book, and then, suddenly,
you’d STEP OUT of the story and soliloquise..
“Wow, what a beautiful plot twist that was,
by the author!”
Have you had that experience?!
Similarly, you may be eating something..
You will jump out of the dish that you are
eating, and you would get into the mind of
the person who cooked it..
That jump is probably a great indication of
Happiness..
When you go, “This piece of software, wow,
what a brainwave by Steve Jobs!”, that is
Happiness.
H. E stands for Engagement.
What is Engagement?
Once you start using it, you get immersed
into it.
You want to have a private conversation with
that thing in front of you.
Could be a product, could be a book, could
be a movie, could be a dish you are eating,
but…
Engaged.
I am not distracted.
I am not doing ten things and this is the
eleventh one.
I am Engaged.
A.
A stands for Adoption.
Okay..
This seems new.
I was using something else till now.
I will start using this from now on.
This ALSO from now on.
When you say that, you are adopting.
You are probably changing some habits.
And you are being inclusive.
You invite this thing into your inner circle.
That is A. Adoption.
That leads us to R. R would be Retention.
You took me in.
You liked me so much that you let the older
relationship go!
You say “I don’t need you anymore because
I have got something far better!”
So, that would be Retention.
And finally, here is something that is fundamental
to all these others, is Task Success.
Why did you come here?
To achieve something.
To get something done.
Are you able to complete it 100%? Or, did
you need something else?
Or did you find something lacking?
That is Task Success.
You came here to do something.
Are you able to achieve that one hundred percent
successfully?
HEART.
This lady, her name is Abby Covert.
She has written a book.
Two books actually.
The first one is called “How to make sense
of any mess”.
What a name, eh?!
But, hey.. when talking about appropriateness
of names, what a name.. “Covert”..
See the meaning of that word.
A usability expert, a user experience specialist,
an information architect, .. would such a
person name themselves COVERT??
Anyway…
If you go to the fifth chapter of this book,
it talks about getting user feedback and gives
you eighteen, EIGHTEEN, different ways you
have to be alert and aware to receive proper
user feedback!
You please spend some time, the book is free,
available online, .. but I would like to underline
just three of them which were.. kinda interesting!
The first one is Murk.
She says, “You built this product or cooked
this dish or wrote this book or whatever for
something..
To achieve some end goal.
Are users confused, about what else it can
do?
They call it Ekagra Chinthana.
Focused on just one thing.
Instead of that, hinting at capability in
other domains too, is there a sense of murkiness
to your offering?
Check that!”
The other thing she highlights is Competition.
Are there many others doing the same thing
the same way just like you?
That would lead to murkiness too.
“Why should I use this product?
The same thing is possible with that other
product too..”
If Yahoo and Google were similar directories,
Google wouldn’t have become famous.
When there were forty other search engines
doing the same thing, listing stuff as directories,
along came Google, showed nothing on screen,
just a box asking you “Are you feeling lucky?”..
That… is differentiation!
That differentiation is important.
So, look at what competition does.
And, another interesting thing she says is
Backlash.
You claim your product lets people do something.
Do they make a mistake with your product?
Some accident, some unexpected screwups, what
kind of things can go wrong?
Because your product is not easily understandable,
because your users are… idiots..
But, still, is your product accident-proof?
Without complaints, without backlash?
Check that!
Interesting!
She has listed eighteen such items.
Go, check them out!
But, I am going to take you elsewhere..
When we talk about Feedback, when we talk
about listening to our users, and about helping
them, … we can go to the animal kingdom
itself!
Most birds, when they feed their chicks, they
regurgitate the food..
The stuff that they ate just a while ago,
half-digested, they bring it back as a friendlier
goo and offer it to the chicks.
Pampering!
That’s how the bird first tastes food!
Have you seen mothers offer bottle-milk to
the baby?
They sprinkle a few drops of the milk on to
the inside of their wrists!
I asked my sister about it..
Why on earth did she do it!?
That’s when she explained it to me…
If it is too hot, the child won’t be able
to express it in words, it would just cry,
… what if it scalded the tongue, the tender
lips..?
So, this is probably the only place in MY
body which is closest in sensitivity to the
baby’s tender skin!
Wow!
We have read about Dogfooding, and this is
like the next level of Dogfooding!
Do you remember this story in The Ramayana?
Shabari..
That old lady offers berries to Lord Rama.
On his way into the jungle, … berries from
the old lady.
But, she doesn’t just offer a bunch to the
Lord.
She picks the best ones, the ones without
worms, the ones that are, ripe, perfect, and
how?
She bites into them, tests them, tastes them,
finalises, decides, and only then offers!
Next level “taking care of the user”..
Don’t you agree?!
Onam is a festival.
A big deal in Kerala.
Mahabali reappears from underground.
Connected with the Vamana Avatar.
And, every year that he reappears, they celebrate
his arrival, they worship him, it is a Harvest
Festival of sorts.
And, one of the highlights of the festival
is Onam Sadhya.
The big feast!
Amazing feast!
You can zoom in and look at the details of
every dish out here.
This is exactly how the traditional South
Indian plantain leaf lunch is served.
At my home too!
My Grandma had very specific advice to my
mom about what the woman should do when serving
such a lunch.
And, what was that?
Watch and Learn.
You cooked this stuff?
You think your work is done with that?
Nope!
Go, serve it!
And, after serving, watch!
Watch from the kitchen doorway.
See what He likes!
See what He needs more of!
See what He avoids eating…
See what He tastes and crinkles up his eyebrows
and turns up His nose because He doesn’t
like the taste..
Because these are powerful indicators for
what worked out for you today in the kitchen!
Watch, and Learn!
And then, my Grandma would tell us the advice
that she received from HER mother!
You know what my Great Grandma told my Grandma?!
Eat in the same plate!
That is, the Husband will eat something in
a plate, a silver plate, and this Grandma
lady has to wait for Him to finish so that
the same plate can be used, it seems.
Why?
She can immediately get feedback about what
the Man didn’t like..
What the Man left half-eaten..!
Feedback, apparently!
User..
Customer..
Feedback!
Watch.. and Learn!
But, we go to Jeyamohan.
He gives a beautiful twist.
In the fourteenth book of The Mahabharata.
We have often returned to this fount of wisdom.
The same series of books.
The fourteenth book is the one that talks
about the one-year incognito time.
When the Pancha Pandavas don’t move around
the Pancha Pandavas..
They don different names, roles, attire, and
merge into the crowd in the kingdom.
During that time, Arjuna is a dance teacher…
Bhima?
Is in the kitchen.
He is a master-chef.
At this time, when Bhima is in the kitchen,
they are narrated the story of Nala and Damayanthi.
A famous king and his beautiful and powerful
queen.
They have similar backgrounds, both are amazing
cooks.
They cook so well!
In fact, Nala wrote a full book it seems..
That book is named Paaka Darpana.
Nala Paakam, they often say.
Darpana is mirror.
An old man is talking to Bhima, who has just
finished cooking.
And, as Bhima is about to go serve the food,
the old man stays his hand and says, “The
tradition is different here.
The ones who serve are different from the
ones who cook.
That those who cook shouldn’t serve too,
is one of the precepts laid down by King Nala!”.
And, Bhima immediately asks back, “Why so?!”
Look at the answers!
“The guy who has finished cooking would
be feeling top of the world.
He has done it.
He has achieved it.
He has… he has performed chemical magic!
The person who is eating need not feel the
same.
He may be hungry.
He may NOT be hungry.
They may have various backgrounds, and hence
their tastes, their appreciations will vary.
Won’t they?!
Each a different type, at every moment a different
quality.
Changing all the time.
And so, it is possible that the person who
cooked might get angry at the person who is
eating..
He might end up thinking that all the effort
that he had put in the cooking is going unrecognised..
The place one keeps a certain dish on the
leaf, the sequence in which they eat the dishes,
… may all become trigger points for the
cook to fulminate!
The person who cooked should not watch the
terror and the horror that is happening on
the plantain leaf.
Each person may eat it in a different style!
Leave it to them!
You may be justified in that anger but that
doesn’t mean you can do this when serving.
You should do it with a smiling face always!”
There is one more reason, the old man tells
Bhima.
And that is…
“Nothing is a one man job.
It is a teamwork.
You may have cooked something, something else
may have been cooked by somebody else, but
when you are serving, without consciously
realising it, you may add a little more of
what you did, hoping they would give feedback…
“Do you like this dish?!
Shall I serve you one more Mysurpa!”
That is not good manners either!
The person who is a specialist server, he
is going to treat all dishes equally..
all dishes as if he cooked each and every
one of them!
And that is how it SHOULD be served!
Basically, a great case for having a separate
tester in every team!
A separate usability engineer in every team!
If the developer herself does the usability
testing, if the designer herself plans the
user experience, … it would end up like
Bhima’s story!
Beware!
By the way, talking about the bird and regurgitation,
I was reminded of this too..!
There are two words in English — one is
PAMPER.
Go ahead, please pamper.
Shower love and affection.
Treat them as kings and queens.
Go the extra mile for your customers.
Praise them.
Take care of them.
No problem.
Please do that!
But, there is another word in English — Don’t
PANDER.
Pander is to gratify or indulge an immoral
or distasteful desire!
Whatever base, low level, cheap, vulgar desires
are asked of you, to go ahead and fulfil them!
Never do that.
Watch this video a friend shared with me on
Whatsapp.
Pandering to the chick again and again, see
what the mother-bird has wrought!
See what the chick does!
“It is enough to just stand next to it,
the food will automatically come into the
mouth!”, the chick seems to think!
“All I need to do is to open my mouth wide!”..
It hasn’t learned the ways of the world!
Don’t do that to your users..
They call it tough love!
We will address this in one of our future
episodes.
Tough love is what you need to practise!
Thank you!
We will meet again soon!